If the capital city of this country has been taken for a ride by the still popular Kejri for close to two years, with no legal or traffic penalty against him, you would be acknowledging your stupidity if you express surprise at the year- end rendezvous he has just announced.

To this add a quick recap of the Lokpal Bill, and a four time increase in the legislative's salary announced a day earlier, you get obsessed with what a silly option he has come out with, rather than taking up the larger issue where everything was to be discussed with due consensus in the junta durbar.

Actually, as per his self -established protocol, he should have called everyone and discussed, whether an increase in the legislative salaries, (many of whom are are in and out on bail, every fortnight) was due at all, or was an 18% increase in accordance with the Pay Commission the right way to go.

Regarding emissions, there should have been data as to the total amount of emissions allowed per family, which includes each family member, including the retired old man perpetually turning sides on the bed, to reach a certain level of comfort each time by de-bloating.

The emissions from the holy and unholy livestock, and then from the rickety old car, that actually saves carbon because it has to be pushed a kilometer before the engine starts breathing.

Those who have a single car, should ask for a new one on minimum down payment, no EMIs for two years, and a contract for "buy-back" with no deductions, till you work out the emission reduction methods.

So, besides the government's facilitation to help you buy a new car, other options may turn it against religious belief.

Amusingly a car's number plate is often decided by the astrologer.

People who are prone to multiple accidents, shall tell you how a wise man, after taking Rs 40,000 for his wisdom, revealed a number that the accidents have reduced, and even if they occur, he is not harmed.

Of course he asked for a change of the car, the insurance premium, and to keep a driver whose name includes the word "K".

Certainly in a country where beliefs are strong, and road accidents and pot holes are the highest, a change of a decided car number may lead its bearings to infringe on the Pre-amble! There will be a segment who would just ask for the government to make a second car affordable, excluding those who are pregnant with one and waiting for the delivery.

The state of Delhi has a small segment of people with cars, even multiple cars.

Do you have statistics as to what percentage of car owners have two cars, where a car is necessary for the old, women, children, overall safety, or lack of alternative means of transport! Would you send your sick mother or aunt to a hospital visit in an auto or by metro, because you have an even number car with you? People should take up the issue asking for rules and regulations for increase of salaries of legislative members by 400% overnight, and explain to us what new empowerment is passed on to the people by the Lokpal.