I had that same feeling after tracking the skies as they burst over Chennai on December 1, again far away from home.

This is exactly what terrorists want to do kill and strike panic in the hearts of people, uproot homes, wreak large-scale destruction, paralyse an entire city, render it helpless, send government scurrying.

Unlike the tsunami, which ended in some minutes, or previous floods, when it rained once and stopped, this time there were multiple attacks.

Chennai residents have always had a complicated relationship with rain.

In Chennai, for as long as I can recall, there has been a two-fold dread about the north-east monsoon, our main rainy season, which hits Tamil Nadu about the middle of October: One, that it may skip the city altogether, which means we will be counting the last remaining drops in the Red Hills reservoir by the time the next summer arrives, the wells in our homes will dry up, and we will be at the mercy of water tankers; two, we fear that it may actually arrive because the city's shoddy infrastructure always packs up even in the smallest of downpours.

Garbage collection, never Chennai's strong point, comes to a standstill and waste lies rotting at street corners along with leafy branches that fall during the rain someone is always quick to pick up the bigger bits.

They are the ones who had no choice but to abandon their homes as 30,000 cusecs of water came rushing at them after the government took the decision to open the floodgates of the Chembarabakkam reservoir.

Chief Minister Jayalalithaa said after the first bout of flooding in mid-November that the destruction in the face of such unprecedented rain was "inevitable".

When the rain abated on December 3, the chief minister took a quick round of the city just hours before Prime Minister Narendra Modi's aerial survey.

At a time when there should have been maximum government, the Tamil Nadu machinery, which dare not move a muscle without direction from the top, was happy to let civic volunteers, armed with little other than social media and loads of enthusiasm take over rescue and relief work.

It's Sink-ara Chennai, and in a few days, it will be Stink-ara Chennai.