India has said, for instance, that it will reduce carbon emissions intensity by 30-35 per cent by 2030, relative to 2005, and that subject to financial and technical support, it will meet 40 per cent of its energy requirements from renewables (solar and wind) by 2040.

On the other hand, the International Energy Agency (IEA) has projected that coal and oil will remain the bulwark of the future global energy system and that China and India will be the drivers of fossil fuel demand.

It has estimated that India's oil demand will increase from 3.6 million barrels per day (mb/d) today to around 10 mb/d by 2040, and that it will be the largest incremental contributor to coal demand in the world .

The question is, how then can one square the imperative of carbon reduction with the circle of a fossil fuel-dominated energy system? Looked at through their lens, the energy sector looks like it is headed towards an interesting crossroads.

The transportation sector today accounts for 60 per cent of the demand for oil.

The balance is consumed by industry (25 per cent), residential and commercial establishments (10 per cent) and electricity (5 per cent).

Looking though a linear eyeglass, oil looks like it will retain and indeed increase its monopoly share well into the future.

But given that cars are an inherently inefficient asset they are idle for 90 per cent of the time and take up valuable and scarce urban land in parking lots and garages and Generation Y may well see the economic logic of sharing rather than owning, consumers might downgrade cars to a utilitarian commodity.

If on top of these shifts in the transportation model, renewables continue to move down the cost curve and next-generation clean energy technologies like carbon capture and sequestration, cellulosic biofuels (so that there is no competition with agriculture), hydrogen fuel cells and safer nuclear reactors are fast-forwarded from the pilot and demonstration phase to commercial applicability, the hopes of Paris would be within reach.

The larger point is that fossil fuels may remain in the interstices of the energy system, but innovation can ensure they have a cleaner impact than today.