On that day the Court ordered the reinstatement of Mr Colin Williams and deferred consideration of penalty and compensation pending the receipt of written submissions.

The "overbearing and provocative" manner in which Mr Minniti spoke to Mr Williams; [24] The failure to engage the disciplinary code suggested strongly that Mr Gillholme and Mr Minniti were keen to be rid of Mr Williams; [37] 3 Counsel for ACI submitted that the decision to terminate Mr Williams was made in response to what Mr Gillholme and Mr Minniti understood was Mr Williams' conduct.

Counsel also contended that it was action which Mr Gillholme and Mr Minniti believed they were entitled to take under the Act.

Mr Gillholme and Mr Minniti are both experienced in industrial relations.

5 I reject the contention that Mr Minniti's reaction to Mr Williams' putting the telephone down showed that Mr Minniti was merely reacting to provocation rather than acting in deliberate defiance of the Act.

Mr Minniti had the opportunity to put a considered recommendation to Mr Gillholme.

Such a contention is inconsistent with the reasons for judgment of 18 November 2005, in which the Court found that Mr Williams' status as a team coordinator was not a basis for his termination.

However, as counsel for the Union submitted, adherence to the code may have avoided the situation which ACI now finds itself in as a result of its summary dismissal of Mr Williams.

12 Given that Mr Williams has been reinstated and that ACI has been admonished for its conduct in the 18 November 2005 judgment, there are no continuing consequences in respect of ACI's conduct.

Counsel for the Union informed the Court that ACI has, since 18 November 2005, agreed to make adjustments necessary to ensure Mr Williams' financial position is restored.

The applicant have liberty to apply to the Court within 28 days of the date of this order, for an order requiring the respondent to pay to Mr Colin Williams an amount by way of compensation as the Court thinks appropriate.

Counsel for the Respondent: Mr F Parry SC with Mr C O'Grady