Delhi’s air quality is now the worst in the world. But this pollution and health crisis is hardly limited to India’s capital. PM2.5 counts have reached worrying levels across our cities – like Gwalior, Raipur, Patna, Mumbai and Kolkata. Whether with a rapidly expanding metro or with CNG, Delhi has often shown the way forward and it is good that the AAP government is trying to do the same again. Drastic situations do require drastic solutions. So to tackle toxic air quality, AAP has decided to restrict private vehicles with odd and even numbered registration plates on alternate days. This experiment will run for a fortnight from New Year’s Day. There are about 90 lakh registered vehicles in Delhi with about 1,500 new ones being added every day and lakhs more pouring in from neighbouring areas. By cutting this traffic in half, the evenodd scheme has huge potential to push up cleaner air. But what’s disturbing is how little the government seems to have sorted out the many difficulties of this scheme before announcing it. What will citizens do in case they experience an emergency and really need to take their car out on the ‘wrong’ day? Will police stop the cars that defy the new rule or just fine them? Is there enough police strength for this? What about those who don’t have public transport in walking distance? How will the public transport system cope with a dramatic rise in demand? What about that large labour force of plumbers, deliverymen, etc for whom their two-wheeler is essential every day, every hour? The government parries all such questions by saying it’s consulting the transport, revenue and other departments.
Chief minister Arvind Kejriwal has said he will discontinue the scheme if there are problems. But mixed messaging won’t unsnarl traffic or clear the air. Instead of yo-yoing, solve the scheme’s practical problems. Ensure Delhi isn’t thrown out of gear by increasing its public transport capacity manifold over the next three weeks. Rope in all available public transport vehicles from neighbouring states, maximise the capacity of sparsely used ones like school buses, increase the frequency of both metro and suburban trains. Coordination across departments will be critical. Make sure the Delhi police are properly on board. Centre must be supportive too. The scheme’s popularity will grow when Delhi breathes easier – and sets an example for other cities to emulate.