Times view
Will dilute brand
Rudroneel Ghosh
Union Cabinet’s decision to set up six new IITs in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala and Karnataka is a step in the wrong direction. Not only will this dilute the premier brand but also compound problems for the 16 existing IITs.
IITs were meant to be institutions of national importance. Accordingly, they were supposed to admit and train the best brains in the country. Establishing ever more IITs automatically forces lowering of standards. Many of the IITs that were set up in 2008 have failed to impress – IIT Mandi hasn’t even fully shifted to its main campus. They also suffer from a staff crunch, with a significant number of permanent faculty posts lying vacant. Placements in these IITs have been lacklustre too. Even the older IITs have failed to make a mark at the international level, with none of them breaking into the top 100 world universities rankings.
In such a scenario, the focus ought to be on upgrading the existing IITs. This would involve attracting the best teaching talent through flexible compensation, filling faculty vacancies and boosting research. Much like the US Ivy League colleges, IITs should be preeminent institutions. Government should create more general institutes of higher learning rather than harumscarum add to IIT ranks.
Counterview
More the merrier
Pyaralal Raghavan
The argument that adding half a dozen more IITs would reduce quality and diminish the brand value is specious. Such an argument severely misjudges the enormous role IITs have played in building quality education in the country. In fact the first five IITs established their global credentials as early as the 70s and 80s when they accounted for close to 10% of the total engineering enrolments in India. However, IITs have failed to keep pace with growth in demand and their share in total enrolment has shrunk to less than 1% now.
An increase in the number of IITs will not only help to restore their earlier share but also help make up for the large leakage of students who drop out or opt for management and other careers – thereby depriving the economy of contributions in areas of their core competency.
Numbers in fact also show that the 16 IITs are now able to enrol only 10,000 plus students annually, which is only a miniscule share of the estimated 1,00,000 high quality engineers needed in the country each year. Six new IITs would mobilise new talent from far flung, untapped regions and restore the premier role that IITs have historically played in expanding quality education in engineering.