The Indian hockey team won the bronze in the World Hockey League last evening, beating the Netherlands, a team ranked 2nd in the world (we are at No. 6, the highest in decades), in a pulsating game. This is the first time since the Champions Trophy in 1982, where India finished 3rd, has our hockey team finished among the medals in a genuinely world-class event.
While all hockey lovers would rejoice, and rightfully so, we all know there are areas that need to be worked on. There is no doubt that the team has gotten better. Our team can now be counted among the fittest in the world. Of course, the judicious use of the rolling-substitution rule helps. More importantly, when you see them play, the boys demonstrate a self-confidence and belief in their abilities, when they take on the top 3 teams in the world, that one has not seen since the days of Mohd Shahid, Zafar Iqbal, Mervyn Fernandez, Sommaya and Pargat Singh.
True, we do not have the players with the flair of any of the ones above, but what the current team possesses is the mental strength that says: ‘no one is unbeatable’. It is something that often our very good teams in the past lacked, especially when playing top ranked teams. But let us look at the areas where we need to work on:-
Our trapping is still below par. Hockey these days is played at a lightening pace, and a pass drilled through a strong defense needs to be trapped so that it can be utilized. We mis-trap far too often. What this means is that a good move comes to a naught. In a close match, it is a BIG difference.
Give away the ball, or lose the ball too easily. If it happens in the opponents half, an attack suddenly turns into a counter-attack. And if we lose the ball in our own half, it means the defense has little time to react. In fact, so many goals against us have been scored due to these errors. Our forwards, despite the speed, are still prodigals when they enter the striking circle. They are almost always in a rush and miff a sure-shot goal-scoring opportunity. Once again, in a close match, it is a big problem.
Inability to earn penalty corners is a big issue. Despite having two world class drag flickers, we still don’t give them as many opportunities due to the inability of our forwards to turn circle penetrations into penalty corners. We, in fact, earn among the lowest PC in the world. Earlier it was a problem of not being able to convert, now it is the inability to earn them.
Last moment jitters. I have no idea why this happens. I have always said that when we are leading, our hockey team ensures we have the longest one minute in the game. Happened against the British who we beat in the quarter finals, and of course, we know what happened yesterday against the Dutch. We conceded two goals in the last 1.5 minutes, with the last being with just 5 seconds to go. Wonder what needs to be done. Some expert advise that helps them maintain their calm in those moments? In fact, I have often joked that the team should be told there are three more minutes for the game to end when there is one, that way they would end the game without the jitters affecting them
Of course, all this also comes a cropper when we are hit by poor umpiring. May sound like a cry baby, but whether one likes it or not, whenever push-comes-to-shove, the umpiring decisions go against our team. It could be fine the entire game, but on critical areas, where it matters, they hurt us. Yesterday, for example, though the video umpire agreed that there was a Dutch back stick in their 25-yard line, he said no PC to India, and even more absurdly, said ‘India lose their referral’. It was a crucial period and it hammers the team psychologically too. As I said, these are decisions that are close and invariably they go against us. Why?
Now that India is putting so much money into world hockey, when so much sponsorship is coming from India, when India is hosting some of the biggest tournaments, when so much money is being made by players all over the world courtesy the Hockey India league, why shouldn’t we demand from FIH that at least be fair to our teams? To be fair, there has been an improvement in the umpire’s attitude towards us too, but decades of undermining our efforts would take some effort and time to veer off. Perhaps a strong word from Hockey India and even the sponsors would help, not to get an unfair advantage, but to avoid getting shafted when it counts.
The most credible and effective way for the team to silence all umpires and all others, of course, would be to perform consistently at the level they have been performing. If they can make each and every match count, if they let the opponents know that we are now in the big league and will not be a pushover, for we do not have a bad day any more, it would make a world of a difference.
And finally, the team needs the public support. Public support can lift the mood of any team. The current team has the raw material to not let you down if you support them.
So, I would say, Nike! Or just do it!