If the capital city of this country has been taken for a ride by the still popular Kejri for close to two years, with no legal or traffic penalty against him, you would be acknowledging your stupidity if you express surprise at the year- end rendezvous he has just announced.
To this add a quick recap of the Lokpal Bill, and a four time increase in the legislative’s salary announced a day earlier, you get obsessed with what a silly option he has come out with, rather than taking up the larger issue where everything was to be discussed with due consensus in the junta durbar.
Actually, as per his self -established protocol, he should have called everyone and discussed, whether an increase in the legislative salaries, (many of whom are are in and out on bail, every fortnight) was due at all, or was an 18% increase in accordance with the Pay Commission the right way to go.
Regarding emissions, there should have been data as to the total amount of emissions allowed per family, which includes each family member, including the retired old man perpetually turning sides on the bed, to reach a certain level of comfort each time by de-bloating.
The emissions from the holy and unholy livestock, and then from the rickety old car, that actually saves carbon because it has to be pushed a kilometer before the engine starts breathing.
Lining up your best arguments, collecting data about law in similar situations but different countries, interviewing traffic inspectors, is an exercise that would confirm further stupidity. Those who have a single car, should ask for a new one on minimum down payment, no EMIs for two years, and a contract for “buy-back” with no deductions, till you work out the emission reduction methods.
Not so difficult. A month ago, the actual expenditure of a fly-over by strict audit was found to be Rs. 100cr less. That can’t be in isolation. Just run a hand under the pliers of a fifty more, and you may find similar amounts. Regarding the roll back of 400% in- crease in the salaries of the representatives of the “Aam Aadmi”, I leave it for the people of Delhi to take it the way they want to.
Analysed legally, the directive clearly states the alternative use of “odd” and “even” number plates. That the objective is to reduce emissions is presumptive. The directive does not say anything beyond. So, besides the government’s facilitation to help you buy a new car, other options may turn it against religious belief.
Amusingly a car’s number plate is often decided by the astrologer. I have it from here say, that in certain states the digits should add up to “9”, or a numerical that adds up to the total of all digits of your birth date, at times counted as per the original Vedic calendar. People who are prone to multiple accidents, shall tell you how a wise man, after taking Rs 40,000 for his wisdom, revealed a number that the accidents have reduced, and even if they occur, he is not harmed.
Of course he asked for a change of the car, the insurance premium, and to keep a driver whose name includes the word “K”. Beliefs. Period.
Then there are those who consider “786” as auspicious (though the debate is still on). Constitutionally, you cannot barge into anyone’s faith or belief. Certainly in a country where beliefs are strong, and road accidents and pot holes are the highest, a change of a decided car number may lead its bearings to infringe on the Pre-amble! (You know multi-storey buildings, hotel rooms, and hospital beds don’t have a number 13!)
The problem is that a rule has been passed, presumably with a view to divert the public from bigger transgressions, without stating the desired end point. There will be a segment who would just ask for the government to make a second car affordable, excluding those who are pregnant with one and waiting for the delivery. They may have to wait for a year!
But I surely admire the political chicanery of the ‘Kejri’. The state of Delhi has a small segment of people with cars, even multiple cars. What exceeds this number by more than a hundred times are the ones who are “Bey-cars”. There are two aspects to it. Is this order without an end point devised to drive a wedge between car-haves, and car-have-nots? Is this going to upset the social synergy between the presumably rich (though, a car is an object of utility, safety of travel for women and children), and drive a wedge between the underprivileged, who actually are happy and live in synergy.
Do you have statistics as to what percentage of car owners have two cars, where a car is necessary for the old, women, children, overall safety, or lack of alternative means of transport! Would you send your sick mother or aunt to a hospital visit in an auto or by metro, because you have an even number car with you? Such skewed and dreadful distortion to create a renewed vote bank.
In politics, as in the professional world, it is better to withhold the non- applicable, ill- conceived reforms. As an advice, to get upset or to discuss this craftily timid order is meaningless. The onus is on the government to enforce it. People should take up the issue asking for rules and regulations for increase of salaries of legislative members by 400% overnight, and explain to us what new empowerment is passed on to the people by the Lokpal.
It is binding for the government to put it across to the people, as this was a major plank on which it came to power. The car-rule take it, is a red-herring. The argument of salaries and Lokpal should be taken head-on, or even on a legitimate public platform. Any answer? Yes, and a formidable one. Politics at times has no recluse but mega-distractions! That’s AAP, that’s HUM!
The other is what about the Aam Aadmi? A vegetable vendor, an auto driver, a jhuggi man, may be in their present state. A progressive politico-social structure keeps opportunities open for the vendor to own a store one day, the auto man to have a fleet of taxis, and the jhuggi man to have his two room set. “Bey-car”. How many new jobs were created? Good leaders always think and do beyond the paper and mike?
Back to science. Most cars, in fact all run on the “internal combustion engine”. The first popular one created in 1864 by Siegfried Marcus, simply stated, is a gadget, where the combustible substance is ignited within the gadget. The common four-stroke engine, therefore has four functional areas, one to suck the fuel, the second to compress it (generally a piston), ignite, and finally create mechanical energy that pushes the piston back with force to create movement in other parts attached. The last of course is the “exhaust”, to throw out the burnt gases.
The country has worked in producing more refined fuel that leaves less residual toxic gases. Engine norms have improved. These are taken rather strictly, as the recent Volkswagen case illustrates.
Much pollutants are emitted by long lines of traffic jams, by emission of tons of idling gas. You need logistics to evaluate the stoppage time at each crossing, during various hours of the day. Can better, electronically timed for the hour, signalling help. A centralized traffic control room can alter signal switching time by using algorithms that study the traffic online.
In the UK, one is supposed to switch off idling engines, also named as “Stationary idling offence”. Odd or even numbers are known to respond equally, and there is an immediate and massive cut in the emissions.
“Elementary Watson” is fine, but don’t miss out this important one. The exhaust component of a car is certainly a series of tubes. The important component is the “muffler”. An expanded portion between the pipe and the final exhaust that dampens the flow and allows precipitation of vapor, but importantly muffles the sound. Good mufflers, do somewhat control air and noise pollution. There should be no misunderstanding here!
The recent direction is an attempt to willfully distract the public, enforcing rather than understanding, and finally covering up on the huge raise in salaries that comes from the common man’s toil and taxes. It is depressing that a once fresh, promising leader is proving to be part of the flock he pledged he would change!
Reverting to the topic, the government is heading for the “Stationary Idling offence!”
“Khatir se ya lihaaz sey, mehmaan to gaya. Lekin huzoor aapka imaan bhi gaya,
Vote lekey kehtey ho kisi kaam ka nahi, vote to gaya hee, ehsaan bhi gaya”