Our country is filled with the sound of swearing. Believe it or not – so is our cinema. Omkara, Delhi Belly, the Anurag Kashyap oeuvre… it’s been raining gaalis for quite some time. Surely the censor board understands that the A rating entitles a film to enjoy some colorful cussing.
Yet, all the swearing has been ruthlessly bleeped out of Pan Nalin’s brilliant film Angry Young Goddesses.
Imagine an A-rated buddy film with a corporate hot shot, an actor, a photographer, an activist, a singer, etc getting together for a wedding in Goa, with lots of laughter and partying and bonding and even some murders thrown into the mix. Can you really imagine that without the cussing?
Or did the censor board get all hot and bothered because this is a FEMALE buddy film. It’s not men but women cussing in scene after scene. Because hey that’s what works for these characters – except it doesn’t, because the censor board has gone snip, snip, snip all over the dialogue.
You have to see the film to understand the extent to which it has been butchered.
It’s like the Puritans who pinned the Scarlet Letter to Hester Prynne’s breast have come back to life.
And because they are in that kind of mood, they don’t just stop with censoring the cussing but also snip out ‘adivasi’, ‘Indian figure’, ‘lunch’… If the filmmakers need therapy now, the government must pay for it.
It’s not just the sound of the film but also its visuals that are heavily brutalized.
As you can expect from the title, Indian goddesses are a key reference point for the film – its metaphysical core. But the censor board has insisting on blurring all the images of various goddesses in the film. That means more than half the screen is crudely blurred out time after time. By contrast there’s the casualness with which images of goddesses hang around our homes or indeed even our bidi packs and desi daaru.
It just doesn’t make sense. I have never seen a film interrupted, insulted like this.
The censor board has been a rotten bully. It wouldn’t dare to anything of the sort to a bigger banner or the Trinity of Khans or even to any male buddy film.
But the female buddy film brought out that blazing moral sword.
The film is brilliant and maybe I will blog about that when I stop being so angry about how I wasn’t allowed to enjoy its brilliance, uninterrupted.