Last week Parliament did what it exists to do, namely to debate and deliberate. Kirron Kher showed that her saris are not her only fashion statement, but in Parliament too she can deliver the full nine yards.
Parliament was once marked by the great debaters like Minoo Masani, Piloo Mody, George Fernandes and Atal Bihari Vajpayee, but today MPs are only engaged in bringing down the House. All’s not well when MPs keep rushing into the House’s well. Rahul Gandhi says he wants to listen to India’s voice but his voice was rarely heard in Parliament. Nowadays though the Congress VP no longer regards Parliament as one long zero hour.
Netas are busy travelling from House to studio and unparliamentary language at prime time is the substitute for parliamentary decorum. No wonders many voters have passed a no-confidence motion against all netas and believe in the dictum, chor machaye shor.
In the previous government, former PM Manmohan Singh and Sonia Gandhi were known for their silences and the opposition felt stalling was the best way to move. In this government PM Narendra Modi was accused of bunking Parliament, which is why his interventions last week show that he certainly isn’t Maun Modi when he chooses not to be.
The monsoon session may have been washed out but at least the winter session has broken some of the chill between opposition and treasury benches. The tears of Kumari Selja who said she was denied entry into a temple because of her caste showed that even though the House was debating the Constitution, constitutional values in the rest of the country are still debatable.
The debate on the Constitution and on intolerance had enough moments of fine cut and thrust to suggest that MPs can discover their parliamentary spirit when they want, even though the opposition is determined to deny any goods and services to the government. Meanwhile Sumitra Mahajan lives by the dictum Carry On Speaker, even though her floor management as more headmistress than chair doesn’t allow too many motions.
Viewers have often sat transfixed at the horrors of tele-democracy when watching the proceedings of a divided house on TV. But B R Ambedkar’s dream of a constitutional republic was somewhat realised in the debates last week. Of course when we recall India’s founding fathers and then gaze on some parliamentarians, we are forced to sing yeh kya hua, kab hua, kyon hua.