My father is a staunch supporter of Narendra Modi and the BJP government. Given the views he holds, in today’s parlance, he is certainly far removed from being classified as a liberal; in fact some of the conspiracy theory chain e-mails that he forwards to me so generously are the reason why my hair is turning gradually white. At the same time, in a lived sense, he is the most liberal person i have known in my life. At a time when the standard relationship between a father and his children was one of resentful obedience, we grew up in a house where my brother and i could not only freely argue with my father but do so loudly and angrily, without in any way confusing the argument with the arguer. I will not embarrass him by recounting the many small ways in which he has helped others, cutting across many of the divides of class, caste and religion that have become fault lines today.
The purpose of striking this autobiographical note is to reflect on the dichotomy that often exists between how people act and the views they hold. The relationship that people enjoy at a more abstract level with the larger world outside seems to get more weightage nowadays than the one they have with their immediate surroundings. Labels like liberal or conservative capture but a small aspect of the complexity of a person, and even here, they may not necessarily give a clue to how people behave in their everyday lives.
There is more common ground between those that express the greatest hatred for each other than is currently being acknowledged. Exceptions aside, in terms of everyday behavior, there is more convergence than polarization and it is important to recognize this. Most of the issues that have been getting people riled up have little to do with their own everyday lives. So many of the raging controversies of the day deal with some symbolic issue or the other- who said what to whom, who did not stand up or salute appropriately, who ‘insulted’ which august institution and so on.
There are more serious issues- when rationalists get killed, when an entire community is ethnically cleansed and rendered homeless,  when someone gets lynched because of what they are rumoured to be eating, or when young children are burned alive because of their caste, but curiously the debates of the day do not seem to differentiate between the real, the symbolically significant, the routine and the trivial. The passion expended is of a similar order of magnitude.
As a result, some of the larger and more complex questions, do not get the attention they deserve- how does one balance the Kashmiri need for greater control over their lives with the Kashmiri Pandit need for respect and dignity in their homeland? How do minorities live a life without fear as equal citizens, unmarked in any way? How does one tackle the issue of a Uniform Civil Code that treats all citizens equally? How does one overhaul a moribund political system that has stopped delivering the possibility of any real democratic engagement? What is an ‘Indian’ way of seeing the world that is at home with today’s times? What kind of social reforms can we agree upon given that the world has changed and old norms and customs must get updated? How can one voice dissenting views without feeling intimidated or getting abused?
We have reached where a reasoned conversation on prickly subjects in the public space has virtually become impossible. As the avenues for expressing our opinions have democratized, the opinions themselves have become more rigid. Earlier, through a magical process of transformation involving bunking class and getting some certification, we ‘became’ engineers, lawyers or advertising executives. Today, by virtue of tweeting, following, trolling or forwarding, we ‘become’ sickulars or bhakts.
The idea that the difference in worldviews is the product of a deep seated class divide has a grain of truth in it, but that is where it stops. People who sat next to each other in class, who work at the same office and who competed ferociously with each other while playing Antakshri are also at loggerheads with each other today. And earlier such differences surfaced occasionally but rarely dominated personal relationships- we responded to other people as people and not as extensions of their political views, something that is changing quite perceptibly in the last few years.
Without trivializing the importance of individual politics, it is still possible to recognize that our opinions are often only the skin of our selves and there are many other layers, thankfully less consumed by a reductive form of hate that we can bask in. Used narrowly, labels murder dialogue, and massacre empathy. We are not important enough to be known by our views, but we are singular in the way we respond to the world, our friends and near and dear ones.
It is instructive to look at the new kind of ways in which people describe themselves on Twitter, also the site for much of the anger and hate. Unlike the past, when individuals were summed up by their education and occupation, today’s identity descriptors are much richer. Here’s one example of a Twitter bio- “Life Coach, Adventurer, Gear Reviewer, Cutlery Collector, Outdoors, Camping & Wildlife enthusiast, Fitness & Krav Maga student, Food Lover & Home Chef”. It is strange that a time when in general, identities are becoming more fluid, and the self is being distributed over a large number of pursuits, politically, our vocabularies of self-description are shrinking.
Holding strong views on politics is an important part of the democratic process. But when we shrink human beings into labels, we lose sight of what we share and focus far too much on what divides us. It is easy to hate a label, not so much a flesh-and-blood person.