The mediaeval Delhi Sultan Muhammad-bin-Tughluq had a bright idea one day in the year 1327. The people of the capital city of Delhi were, he realized, the victims of invasions by the likes of Mongols from the north-west. Ergo, he decreed, the capital of the Tughluq sultanate would be shifted from Delhi in the north to Daulatabad in central India. All Delhiites were forced to march south to Daulatabad in central India. Thousands protested during the march. The sultan then felt it wasn’t such a great idea after all and marched them back to Delhi. It was a classic case of poor implementation of a good idea. In view of the persistent threat of invasion, it made sense to shift the capital to Daulatabad but the sultan did not have to force the people of Delhi to accompany his retinue and that too without consulting them.
Some 688 years later, in response to a court’s comment that Delhi has become a gas-chamber in terms of atmospheric pollution, the chief minister Arvind Kejriwal has decided that, from January 1, 2016, private vehicles with licence-plates ending with odd and even numbers should ply on alternate days. His supporters point out that China had successfully enforced such a system during the 2008 Beijing Olympics.
What the Kejriwal fan-club is forgetting is that the rulers’ decrees are inevitablv deemed successful in China because anyone with any opinion to the contrary (from the local media or otherwise) is likely to be put under house arrest or worse for disturbing “stability”.
For instance, it is only now after decades that China is abandoning the one-child policy because the number of youths has become disproportionately smaller than the number of aged people. However, at the time when the then Chinese leadership decided to enforce a one-child norm for all families across the country so as to control the population, the policy was inevitably hailed as successful since opinions to the contrary were penalized.
Granted, restrictions on vehicle-use may have succeeded to a certain extent in democracies like the Sao Paolo Metropolitan Region in Brazil. However, there is no multiplicity of contending agencies in Sao Poalo unlike in Delhi where there is a constant tussle between the state government and the Centre as to who calls the shots.
Critics of Kejriwal’s odd-even-number formula also point out that the public infrastructure (the Metro, buses) just cannot cope if half the city’s vehicle-owners have to rely on mass-transport systems every day. There are almost 9 million private vehicles registered in Delhi, including 2.7 million cars. An estimated 1,500 new private vehicles are registered every day in Delhi.
The Delhi Metro and DTC authorities, therefore, maintain that it is just not feasible to introduce the odd-even formula from January 1 since it could take anywhere between three to six months to arrange for additional Metro coaches and buses, respectively.
One quixotic response to this decree to introduce the odd-even-number formula could be a scenario where car-owners buy a second vehicle and register it with an odd license-number if the first car has an even number, and vice versa.
However, not all car-owners can afford a second vehicle, the notable exception being the Delhi MLAs. Each Delhi MLA’s salary has recently been quadrupled. After the quadrupling, each Delhi MLA could get more than the President of India or the PM and can hence afford a second car whose licence-plate could be registered as ending in an odd number if the first car has has a licence-plate ending in an even number, or vice versa.
Muhammad-bin-Tughluq would have approved. Like the IIT-Kharagpur alumnus Kejriwal, Muhammad-bin-Tughluq was highly educated. The mediaeval Delhi sultan was a scholar of logic, philosophy, mathematics, astronomy, physical sciences and calligraphy. Wikipedia tells us that in addition to being a polymath who was also interested in medicine, Muhammad-bin-Tughluq was a polyglot who could speak several languages from Persian and Arabic to Turkish and Sanskrit.
Granted, something has to be done, with Delhi earning the dubious reputation of being the most polluted city in the world on some days. In Delhi, the particulate matter of up to the PM-25 level (a micrometre is one-millionth of a metre and a level of up to 2.5 is 100 times thinner than a human hair and is considered lethal since it can lodge within the human lung) has soared above 300 micrograms per cubic metre of air on some days, which is 12 times higher than the WHO safety-level. Whether it is Tughluq in 1327 or Kejriwal in 2015, successful crisis-management entails involving all the stake-holders and working in harmony with them Kejriwal now says he will not be too rigid and will try out his odd-even-number formula for a few days to see if it works. It makes more sense to plan it out in advance and involve all stake-holders, which was something the Delhi sultan failed to do in 1327, some 688 years ago.