The RBI’s fifth bimonthly monetary policy announcement last Tuesday contained no surprises. As expected, it kept policy rates unchanged. Likewise, both GDP and inflation projections also remained unchanged. Prima facie, therefore, the statement lived up to what Mervyn King, a former Bank of England governor, famously listed as an essential feature of good monetary policy: Boring.
Raghuram Rajan was clear that for now he’d rather wait and watch. The essence of his latest policy statement is, perhaps, best summed in a word made famous by fellow Tamil, K Kamaraj. Known as the kingmaker in Indian politics of the 1960s, the wily president of the Indian National Congress, Kamaraj’s response to all questions was invariably the same: ‘Parkalam’ (Let’s see).
It served Kamaraj well during the turbulent politics of the ’60s. And it served Rajan well on Tuesday. The macro-economic scenario today, especially the global one, is just as unpredictable as the politics of the 1960s. As the world awaits the outcome of the Federal Open Markets Committee (FOMC) meeting on December 15 and 16 with bated breath, turbulence is not far from the surface either.
In these circumstances, the governor’s decision to ‘parkalam’ — to hold his horses — till he gets a better fix on what the US Federal Reserve, the de-facto global central bank, decides at its forthcoming FOMC meet makes eminent sense.
Markets clearly approved. The Sensex closed 24 points higher. Never mind that a careful reading of the fine print of the statement shows the RBI has reservations on both its growth and inflation projections. So, while “inflation is expected to broadly follow the path set out in the September review”, there are “slight risks to the downside”. At the same time, on the growth front, the bank now sees “a mild downside bias”, even though it has kept the growth projection unchanged at 7.4%.
Ordinarily, a mere mention of the possibility of lower-than-projected growth would have spooked markets. Especially since retail inflation has increased for the third successive month in October.
Nonetheless, markets gave a vote of confidence to Rajan. The near-unanimous opinion was in favour of status quo, and Rajan obliged.
Does that mean it’s full marks to Rajan and Co? Not quite. In the one area where the governor should have shown some flexibility — determination of the base rate using marginal cost of funding to get lending rates down — the governor seems to have dug his heels in. Unfortunately.
Consider this. The one market where the RBI could expect nearcomplete transmission is the government securities market. But here the rates have barely budged. On January 15, the date of the first repo rate cut, the yield on the benchmark 10-year government securities fell from 7.77% to 7.69%. On December 1, after a 125 basis points cut in the repo rate, the yield on 10-year G-Secs stood at 7.75%.
To be sure, it is frustrating for any central bank governor to find the market not responding to his interest rate signals. But the answer to that is not to arm-twist banks into adopting a textbook pricing formula. It is to try and iron out glitches in the transmission mechanism. And this includes the RBI’s own inability to influence interest rates over the longer term.
The RBI influences the yield curve through the repo rate and open market operations (OMO). While the former influences the very short-term end of the yield curve, OMO, which involves selling/buying GoI securities by the RBI from its investment portfolio, influences yields for different maturities. The impact of a change in the repo rate on banks’ lending rates is, at best, minimal.
Combining Action
If the RBI wants to influence longerterm rates, it must combine repo rate action with aggressive OMO across maturities. However, for a variety of reasons, it is unable to do so at present. Hence, the resort to strong-arm tactics with banks. Unlike the government bond market, they can be bullied.
Leave aside the larger question of whether the RBI should get into the business of laying down how the base rate should be determined instead of leaving it to market forces.
Insistence on 100% transmission in a scenario where deposit interest rates are fixed while lending rates are floating is to miss the wood for the trees. Any reduction in the repo rate can only impact interest rates on fresh loans.
It cannot impact interest rates on old loans extended out of deposits contracted earlier at higher rates. Over a period of time, as the quantum of incremental deposits taken at lower rates of interest increases, it will bring down the overall cost of funds for banks and lead to lower lending rates.
If the RBI does not see the logic of the argument, banks will ultimately be compelled to cut interest rates on deposits. Already, deposit interest rates have fallen between 80-100 basis points since January. At a time when household savings in financial assets have contracted sharply and deposit growth has slowed, will the RBI’s obduracy in using marginal cost of funding to fix base rates result in a remedy that is worse than the disease?