This, as per the commission’s calculations, will lead to an increase in the salary bill by about 0.65 per cent of GDP.
Two, the increase in the estimated share of the PAP in total revenue expenditure should be 3.81 per cent, as against 4.25 per cent suggested in the commission’s report.
Let us look at such possible impacts in the coming year.
Following this, it clearly shows that compared to the Sixth Pay Commission, the latest recommendations would result in minimum macroeconomic shocks to most of the macroeconomic variables.
For instance, as compared to a hike of 54 per cent in the minimum pay in the Sixth Pay Commission, the hike this time is just about 14.3 per cent.
Apart from this, the report has also removed many of the ambiguities that the previous pay commission had introduced.
The commission assumes a nominal growth of 11.5 per cent with an inflation rate of 4 per cent in 2016-17.
The commission’s recommendations will raise the revenue deficit by 0.63 per cent of GDP, with no change assumed in the capital expenditure and yet, it hopes to achieve the fiscal deficit target of 3.5 per cent in FY17.
And considering that the consensus GDP growth forecast for the current financial year is just 7.2 per cent, the commission’s expectation of a 7.5 per cent GDP growth in the next financial year (FY17) looks unrealistic.
Further, an National Institute of Public Finance and Policy analysis (Working Paper No 2015-148) submitted to the 14th Finance Commission suggested that even with an assumption of a modest pay hike of 15 per cent (very close to the actual recommendations without One rank one pension), there is a need to compromise on either the fiscal deficit target or the share of capital expenditure (or perhaps both).
The 14th Finance Commission had ignored the Seventh Pay Commission impact (as there were no estimates available during the finance commission period) and the government worked out the FRBM targets without this information.
What could be the impact of the pay hike on inflation?
On this front, this commission needs to be applauded for breaking the vicious cycle of higher expenditure-higher inflation-higher expenditure initiated by the Sixth Pay Commission recommendations.
So, overall, the recommendations could result in better macroeconomic stability.
Another important issue that needs clarity is the commission’s claim of a smaller increase in the PAP/ GDP ratio (at 0.63 per cent) as compared to the previous commission (at 0.77 per cent).
One possibility is allowing
pay revision once every five years and preceding the finance commissions.
This would avoid shocks and ensure better macro-fiscal balance.
