During the last few years, and especially since its migration to Goa, many film lovers have observed that Iffi has been increasingly pandering to the tastes and styles of Bollywood, under the delusion that an international film festival like Iffi requires Bollywood stars to add charm to it.
It had featured some of the most outstanding films and filmmakers from Asia, Africa and Latin America.
But in recent years, the shift has been evident — one finds European-Hollywood films and “masters” occupying centrestage.
This is also the fallout of the post-1990s scenario, with the market usurping the cultural space and leadership vacated by the state.
This arrangement, despite its bureaucratic preferences and statist imperatives, ensured a fair representation of films.
Since the 1990s, with the retreat of the state from cultural patronage, private agencies, museums, programmers and curators, apart from production houses and marketing agencies, have captured the international film festival circuit.
They spot, project and celebrate the contemporary “classics” and “masters” from various countries and cultures.
Most crucial are the clout of global production houses and marketing agencies.
The pull factors gradually begin to develop into an aesthetic of their own, prompting curators and programmers to fall in line, and even filmmakers from the margins to follow certain political ground rules and experimental patterns.
In this unequal cultural exchange, festivals like Iffi don’t have much of a say but are forced to pay the prescribed screening fees to procure films in the circuit.
In both ways, we are on the losing side: We get their films to our festivals paying fat fees, whereas our films get a pittance.
With almost half a century of experience, it’s time Iffi took the initiative in packaging, curating and marketing quality Indian films (not Bollywood).
The other striking thing about Iffi this year was the cold response to the FTII strike.
There were protests by students and filmmakers like Saeed Mirza, R.V. Ramani, Dhritiman Chatterjee, etc.
Staring at cineaste citizens are obvious, but very hard, choices.
