Much ground was covered, including the need to move towards a comprehensive uniform civil code, systemic corruption, legislative reservations for women, social security and justice in development.
Inevitably, political brownie points were also scored on all sides.
Yet, despite words that wounded, the words that bind were more pervasive: All parties renewed their constitutional faith.
Many aspects of what Babasaheb had said are now unforgivably forgotten.
He said: “Bhakti in religion may be a road to the salvation of the soul.
But in politics, bhakti or hero-worship is a sure road to degradation and to eventual dictatorship.”
How do we avoid this degradation caused to national life by acts of routine political sycophancy?
Do we need yet another national debate on the radical evils that pave our paths, both political and social?
Ours probably is the only constitution that declares as an aspect of fundamental rights certain social practices as an offence, which are to be redressed by parliamentary legislation and oversight under Article 35.
And it has made laws, the last being the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 2013.
Atrocities against “untouchables” continue, and these notably include arson, rape and gangrape, mass and individual murder, stripping and parading, pursuit of “obnoxious” occupations as well as thousands of unspeakable daily horrors.
This is not to say that no change has occurred in the past six decades — it has, but at a glacial pace.
Similarly, Census 2001 figures revealed 1.26 crore working children in the age group of 5-14, as compared to the total child population of 25.2 crore; approximately 12 lakh children work in hazardous occupations/ processes.
Progress seems to have been made, if we take on board the National Sample Survey Organisation’s 2004-05 data, which estimates the number of working children at 90.75 lakh, and Census 2011, which places the number of working children in the age group of 5-14 years at 43.53 lakh.
Anyhow, new global impoverishment measures and new intersectional inequality truths underscore that impoverishment is multidimensional.
But even to achieve this bare minimum, plenty of hard governance and non-government organisation work lies ahead.
Making social peace with unconstitutional and unjust ways and means is neither an appropriate nor sustainable developmental response.
