Likewise, both GDP and inflation projections also remained unchanged.
Prima facie, therefore, the statement lived up to what Mervyn King, a former Bank of England governor, famously listed as an essential feature of good monetary policy: Boring.
The essence of his latest policy statement is, perhaps, best summed in a word made famous by fellow Tamil, K Kamaraj.
And it served Rajan well on Tuesday.
The Sensex closed 24 points higher.
At the same time, on the growth front, the bank now sees “a mild downside bias”, even though it has kept the growth projection unchanged at 7.4%.
Ordinarily, a mere mention of the possibility of lower-than-projected growth would have spooked markets.
Especially since retail inflation has increased for the third successive month in October.
Nonetheless, markets gave a vote of confidence to Rajan.
The near-unanimous opinion was in favour of status quo, and Rajan obliged.
Does that mean it’s full marks to Rajan and Co?
In the one area where the governor should have shown some flexibility — determination of the base rate using marginal cost of funding to get lending rates down — the governor seems to have dug his heels in.
The one market where the RBI could expect nearcomplete transmission is the government securities market.
On January 15, the date of the first repo rate cut, the yield on the benchmark 10-year government securities fell from 7.77% to 7.69%.
To be sure, it is frustrating for any central bank governor to find the market not responding to his interest rate signals.
But the answer to that is not to arm-twist banks into adopting a textbook pricing formula.
And this includes the RBI’s own inability to influence interest rates over the longer term.
The RBI influences the yield curve through the repo rate and open market operations (OMO).
The impact of a change in the repo rate on banks’ lending rates is, at best, minimal.
However, for a variety of reasons, it is unable to do so at present.
Hence, the resort to strong-arm tactics with banks.
Unlike the government bond market, they can be bullied.
Any reduction in the repo rate can only impact interest rates on fresh loans.
It cannot impact interest rates on old loans extended out of deposits contracted earlier at higher rates.
Already, deposit interest rates have fallen between 80-100 basis points since January.
