Welcoming the announcements, Keith Burnett, vice chancellor of the University of Sheffield, said: “The drop in the number of Indian students has had university leaders extremely concerned for a long time.
I have been saying for many years that the government should set targets to increase the number of international students entering the UK and, finally, the chancellor has listened and set a target of a 55,000 increase in the number of international students by 2019-2020.
The statement will certainly encourage Indian students to come to the UK and hopefully arrest the decline,” he told ET.
Bilimoria said that after a prolonged period of sending out harmful, negative rhetoric to those hoping to study in the country, this proposal by Osborne puts the UK on the right course to make changes in policy that will not just allow but encourage international students to study in the country.
“I hope that the UK government will target prospective Indian students with its policy initiatives, for example by reintroducing a post-study work visa for foreign students, including Indian students, which were in place before the previous government changed it.
Recently, mayor London Boris Johnson had proposed new measures to help the city retain its position as the education capital of the world and arrest the sharp decline in the number of Indian students who went there to study.
These students contribute £3 billion to the capital’s economy and help support 37,000 jobs, according to research from mayor Johnson’s promotional agency London and Partners.
India is the third-largest inte
rnational student market in London after China and America.
However, the number of Indian students studying at London’s higher education institutions has more than halved over the last five years.
In 2009-10, there were 9,925 Indian students in UK’s capital while in 2013-14 there were only 4,790.
The second proposal is of a work visa for graduates in science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM) for up to two years.
It would also help to meet a critical skills shortage in the UK in areas such as life sciences, engineering and technology.
UK’s Post Study Work Visa, which gave non-EU students the right to remain in the UK for two years after graduation, was closed in 2012.
