He would say he was dumb, that he had to mull things over and over again.
He would say he was sure that a particular idea was relevant to the question we had posed.
I’d ask why, he’d say he didn’t know.
But three months later it would be obvious.
Most academics are lucky if they participate in one revolution.
Much of his best work addressed this question.
Arguably his best book, Structure and Change in Economic History (1981), dug deeper into the problem of development, providing the beginning of the Northian approach to understanding institutions.
Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance (1990) represents the culmination of this research path and remains the premier statement of the profound role played by institutions in economic, political and social realms of action.
Twenty-five years later, economists, political scientists and sociologists continue to mine this rich line of research.
In Understanding the Process of Economic Change (2005), Doug drew on recent developments in cognitive science to expand our understanding of human choice and action.
His last book, co-authored with John Wallis and myself, developed a new approach to thinking about the problem of development.
Violence and Social Orders: A Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History (2009) highlights the role of violence.
North’s approach has had practical implications for development.
At a time when economists and the international community focused almost exclusively on markets, Doug knew this wasn’t enough.
Most important was the need to create a hospitable political environment for markets, one free from government expropriation and predation.
Institutions that created incentives for officials to abide by these rules were also necessary.
The best laws administered by a corrupt system were of little help.
This approach, including the now common phrase “good governance”, is standard today.
Paul impressed Doug, not only for his brilliance, but for his attitude about economics and research more generally.
In discussing the role of mathematics in economics, Paul said, “First we get the economics right, then we build the models.”
Doug and I were seduced into a collaboration that produced a joint paper.
This Thanksgiving, I’ll give thanks for the many years I enjoyed his friendship.
