As artists, we refuse to be “tolerated” by the powerful.
The incidents that follow are, perhaps, a sign of the alarming certainty with which this is happening.
As a member of Sandarbh, an artists’ initiative hosting an international artists’ residency supported by the Jaipur Art Summit 2015, I was in Jaipur on the morning of November 21.
At 10 am, a slightly concerned Siddhartha Kararwal called fellow artist and founding member of Sandarbh, Chintan Upadhyay.
We don’t believe that defining what is art and what lies outside its purview is the sole prerogative of the artist.
It was no longer a discussion about whether or not we have a right to express ourselves, but rather a reality-check on the diminished freedoms that we could claim as artists and the public could claim as spectators.
Recently, the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) refused a certificate to a film, alleging it was “substandard and boring”.
If CBFC members can play all-powerful film critics, then why can’t a police constable decide what kind of work artists should make and people see? Absurdity is at the core of horror.
Almost in a flash, the comic gave way to the horrific, and we found ourselves being pushed, shooed and dragged by the hair to the police van that had been waiting all this while.
We were threatened with torture because we had the audacity to ask them under what charges or sections we were being detained.
He repeated, “So was it a dead cow or a living cow?”
Unsatisfied, he asked us again: “That’s ok, but was the cow sculpture dead or alive?”
We tried to explain to him that it was beyond dead or alive because it was plastic.
Meanwhile, the police realised that neither Upadhyay nor I were the makers of the controversial art work.
So now, before releasing us, they thought it important to take custody of both the “culprit” artist and the cow.
Three agonising hours into our arrest, we were released.
The artists present, the young and not-so-young, had learned a lesson in censorship and self-censorship.
