The relative importance of state finances is only going to grow.
On the one hand, the Centre has already begun transferring a much higher share of the divisible pool of resources to the states.
As state revenues grow, so will their explicit liabilities.
For starters, they typically trade 40 basis points (bps) above Central government yields.
This could either reflect a credit spread — showing higher credit risk because there’s no explicit sovereign guarantee for these bonds — or a liquidity premium, given that the market for state bonds is much less liquid than that for G-Secs.
To test which of these it is, we look at the cross-sectional variation across states.
More generally, why are bond yields so closely clustered around each other — with only a 6 bps difference between the highest and lowest among the 14 states that participated in the October 13 auction?
But it’s hard to imagine that when both are added up, debt levels are exactly identical across states, so as to warrant such little price differentiation.
Instead, there seem to be two other fundamental issues driving the distortionary pricing.
These perceptions are likely reinforced by the fact that the risk-weights assigned to state loans for the purposes of capital adequacy are zero.
But the size of the CSF is 0.4 per cent of the GDP, versus an outstanding stock of state bonds of 9.5 per cent of the GDP.
So, the perception is largely of an implicit guarantee by the Centre — thereby suggesting that the spread above G-Secs largely reflects a liquidity premium.
Second, there’s no real market for state bonds, with virtually no secondary market trading.
Expanding the investor base is therefore important for creating more market depth and liquidity.
But this is an important first step and the interest was large: $500 million in bonds was lapped up by FPIs in less than a week.
Now, we must extend that to the market for state debt, because in a couple of years, state deficits will account for almost half of the consolidated deficit.
The landmark 1997 agreement between the RBI and the finance ministry, ending the automatic monetisation of deficits, was a key moment in reforming the market for Central government bonds and led to better price discovery.
Only then will price differentiation across states occur.
