He said that two constables from the neighbouring Bajaj Nagar thana had asked him to dismantle his work, produced during the residency and on exhibit at Shilpgram, Jawahar Kala Kendra, as part of the Jaipur Art Summit.
On the contrary, he was attempting to highlight the poor conditions of animals in urban India.
It was soon evident that they were not in search of reason, but a pretext.
It must be added here that it was equally crucial for them to produce a justification for their actions.
And the first reason cited by the officer concerned was that it was alright for Kararwal’s work to be removed because it was not an artwork in the first place!
But then, it is not the prerogative of the police, either.
Things took an even more bizarre turn as the conversation shifted from the “sentiments” of a faceless majority to the possible ways in which the work could be changed to appear more palatable to the police.
It is impossible to imagine horror without the absurd.
But before horror becomes truly horrific, it must become comic, fleetingly that is.
Almost in a flash, the comic gave way to the horrific, and we found ourselves being pushed, shooed and dragged by the hair to the police van that had been waiting all this while.
During the short journey to the police station, we were reminded by two constables that this is not Pakistan.
We were threatened with torture because we had the audacity to ask them under what charges or sections we were being detained.
We remained silent.
We tried to explain to him that it was beyond dead or alive because it was plastic.
His curiosity dissipated.
(All good horror plots have their dull moments.)
Meanwhile, the police realised that neither Upadhyay nor I were the makers of the controversial art work.
Its maker, Kararwal, was missing.
As the unfortunate incident unfolded, dozens of Indian and foreign artists, hundreds of audience members and participants at the summit watched shell-shocked.
They had realised that we may be caught up in a debate about tolerance and intolerance but, in fact, we are a society squeezed between the horror of unbridled irrationality and the irrepressible terror of power.
To borrow a phrase from Gabriel Garcia Marquez, “This, my friends, is the crux of
our solitude.”
