Last year, total expenditure at the state level (17.1 per cent of the GDP) was much higher than the Centre’s expenditure (13.3 per cent), and state capital expenditure (capex) was almost double the Centre’s.
On the one hand, the Centre has already begun transferring a much higher share of the divisible pool of resources to the states.
So, it’s natural to ask what market signals state bonds are getting.
Much is made of the ebbs and flows of yields of Central government securities (G-Secs) because they reflect the cost of government borrowing, help determine the sustainability of Central government debt and create market-based incentives to remain fiscally prudent at a time when the FRBM Act has occasionally been “relaxed” and fiscal roadmaps changed.
Against this backdrop, what are state bond yields telling us?
For starters, they typically trade 40 basis points (bps) above Central government yields.
To test which of these it is, we look at the cross-sectional variation across states.
But instead, we find exactly the opposite.
West Bengal’s debt-to-GDP ratio is almost twice that of Maharashtra, but its bond yields trade only 1 bps above Maharashtra’s.
Why is Gujarat not being rewarded and Rajasthan not facing a higher cost of borrowing?
One could argue that markets take into account both explicit and implicit (SEB) liabilities to have a broader definition of debt.
First, while there are no explicit sovereign guarantees, markets are likely assuming and pricing in an implicit guarantee by the Central government.
On the back of this implicit guarantee, it doesn’t matter what states’ individual vulnerabilities are because, if things go pear-shaped, the Centre will step in.
These perceptions are likely reinforced by the fact that the risk-weights assigned to state loans for the purposes of capital adequacy are zero.
Second, there’s no real market for state bonds, with virtually no secondary market trading.
Expanding the investor base is therefore important for creating more market depth and liquidity.
On this front, policymakers need to be commended.
But while expanding the investor base is a necessary condition for price discovery, it’s not a sufficient condition.
States will not be rewarded by markets for prudence, nor punished for profligacy.
And market signals are important because the 14th Finance Commission doesn’t provide incentives for states to reduce deficits below 3 per cent of the GDP.
We, therefore, need to rely on market signals to shape incentives.
But none of this will happen, as long as there’s an implicit sovereign guarantee from the Centre.
Institutional and market development that leads to better price discovery has underpinned India’s reforms over the last 25 years.
We must now reform the market for state bonds by rolling back distortionary implicit sovereign guarantees.
And only then will the conditions emerge for true competitive fiscal federalism.
